📖 CAEP: Clusterctl redesign (#1558)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/proposals/20191016-clusterctl-redesign.md

Another source of confusion is the current scope of clusterctl, which in some cases expanded outside of lifecycle management of Cluster API providers. For example, the support for different mechanisms for creating a bootstrap cluster (minikube, kind) takes on an unnecessary complexity and support burden.

As a result, we are proposing a redesign of clusterctl with an emphasis on lifecycle management of Cluster API providers, and a unified user experience across all the Cluster API based providers

### Goals

- Create a CLI that is optimized for the “day one” experience of using Cluster API.
- Simplify lifecycle management (installation, upgrade, removal) of provider specific components.  This includes CRDs, controllers, etc.
- Enable new providers, or new versions of existing providers, to be added without recompiling.
- Provide a consistent user experience across Cluster API providers.
- Enable provider specific deployment templates, or flavors, to end users.  E.g. dev, test, prod, etc.

> - Provide support for airgappen environment

Reviewer: *environments

#### Provider Enablement

- As a Cluster API provider developer, I would like to use my current implementation, or a new version, with clusterctl without recompiling.  

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

> Portions of clusterctl may require changes to the Cluster API data model and/or the definition of new conventions for the providers in order to enable sets of user stories listed above, therefore a roadmap and feature deliverables will need to be coordinated over time.

As of this writing, we envision clusterctl’s component model to look similar to the diagram below:

![components](images/clusterctl-redesign/components.png)

Clusterctl consists of a single binary artifact implementing a CLI; the same features exposed by the CLI will be made available to other management tools via a client library.

During provider installation, clusterctl internal pkg/lib is expected to access provider repositories and read the yaml file specifying all the provider components to be installed in the management cluster.

If the provider repository contains deployment templates, or flavors, clusterctl could be used to generate yaml for creating new workload clusters.  

> Behind the scenes clusterctl will apply labels to any and all providers’ components and use a set of custom objects for keeping track of some metadata about installed providers, like e.g. the current version or the namespace where the components are installed. 

Reviewer 2: Doesn't this seem like an overlap with other sort of installation tools that exist or kustomize?

Author: behind the scene it uses kustomize :-;
the value added is that clusterctl enforce a consistent set of labels that can be used for implementing additional lifecycle actions like e.g upgrade, pivot, delete

#### Init sequence

The clusterctl CLI is optimized for the “day one” experience of using Cluster API, and it will be possible to create a first cluster with two commands after the pre-requisites are met:

```shell

> $ clusterctl init --infrastructure aws

Reviewer 3: Will `init` allow user to provide specific version of a provider?

Author: TBD.
For the default behavior, the version is encoded in the provider configuration (either a specific version or "latest"); users, will be allowed to override such configuration via a config file.

Once this is in place, we can discuss if/how to allow the user to provide specific versions via command line as well, but this requires some additional consideration about the UX because in init many providers can be added at the same time.

Author: after some discussions, we are going to support this from CLI as well.

Probably the syntax will be docker like
```
clusterctl init --infrastructure aws:v0.5.3
```
But exact details will be defined during implementation

$ clusterctl config cluster my-first-cluster | kubectl apply -f -

> $ kubectl apply -f MY_CNI

Reviewer 4: It's a bit cumbersome but worth having the right sequence in the doc
```suggestion
$ kubectl get secret my-first-cluster-kubeconfig -o=jsonpath='{.data.value}' | base64 -D > my-first-cluster.kubeconfig
$ kubectl apply --kubeconfig=my-first-cluster.kubeconfig -f MY_CNI
```

> $ kubectl apply -f MY_CNI

Reviewer 5: Sounds like getting the kubeconfig should be a subcommand of clusterctl?

> $ kubectl apply -f MY_CNI

Reviewer 4: @andrewsykim we thought about it during the early design phase, but decided against including it in `clusterctl`, we should make `kubectl` better at that though.

> $ kubectl apply -f MY_CNI

Author: updated

```

The internal flow for the above commands is the following:

**clusterctl init (AWS):**

![components](images/clusterctl-redesign/init.png)

Please note that “day one” experience:

1. Is based on a list of pre-configured provider repositories; it is possible to add new provider configurations to the list of known providers by using the clusterctl config file (see day 2 operations for more details about this).

> 2. Assumes init will replace env variables defined in the components yaml read from provider repositories, or error out if such variables are missing.

Reviewer 5: Sorry if I missed this detail somewhere else in the proposal, but how are the values of the env vars read? Is the user expected to have them set already? If so how does a user figure out which env vars to set?

Author: > how are the values of the env vars read?

In the POC we are using viper, so set env vars can be set both in os env variables or in a .clusterctl.yaml config file.

>  Is the user expected to have them set already?

yes

>  If so how does a user figure out which env vars to set?

Provider's documentation remains the source of truth for provider-specific settings. 

In the POC, clusterctl from its side is providing some utility for variable discovery + some check from  avoiding errors during init:

- allows the user to discovery the list of required variables using e.g. `clusterctl config provider aws`
```
Name:               aws
Type:               InfrastructureProvider
URL:                https://github.com/fabriziopandini/cluster-api-provider-aws2/releases/latest/infrastructure-components.yaml
Version:            v0.4.1
TargetNamespace:    capa-system
WatchingNamespace:
Variables:
  Name
  ----
  AWS_B64ENCODED_CREDENTIALS
```

- allows the user to check the result of variables substitution using e.g. `clusterctl config provider aws -o yaml` --> the yaml to be installed
- executes a sort of "preflight check" before installing any provider, ensuring all the variables are in place; in case of some variable missing, the error message includes the list of expected variables

Reviewer 5: If we know the set of env vars that are required, how do we feel about adding an interactive prompt to get those values from the user (with validation)? I feel the biggest UX hurdle in CAPV is knowing what the env vars are and what values they can accept. 

Maybe an implementation detail for later?

Reviewer: @andrewsykim any other comments before we mark this thread "resolved"?

Reviewer: Chatted on slack - he's all good

3. Assumes providers will be installed in the namespace defined in the yaml for installing components; at the time of this writing, this leads to having each provider in a dedicated namespace.  This could be customized by specifying the --target-namespace flag.

> 4. Assumes to not change the namespace each provider is watching on objects (settings defined in the yaml for installing components will be used); at the time of this writing, this leads to having each provider watching objects in all namespaces. Pending [1490](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/1490) issue addressed, this could be customized by specifying the --watching-namespace flag.

Reviewer 6: If I understood this correctly, this is effectively saying that we assume that each manager (from CAPI, CAPA, CABPK) can only watch all namespaces for now? If so, we should make it more clear.

Author: Done. please let me know if the new version is more clear.

**clusterctl config:**

![components](images/clusterctl-redesign/config.png)

Please note that “day one” experience:

1. Assumes only one infrastructure provider and only one bootstrap provider installed in the cluster; in case of more than one provider installed, it will be possible to specify the target provider using the --infrastructure and --bootstrap flag.

> 2. In order to fetch template from a provider repository, Assumes a naming convention should be established (details TBD).

Reviewer 6: Do we need to open an issue about this? Or is there already one?

Author: I will open issues/cleanup existing issues as soon as this CAEP is green-lighted

3. Similarly, also template variables should be defined (details TBD).

#### Day 2 operations

The clusterctl command will provide support for following operations

- Add more provider configurations using the clusterctl config file [1]
- Override default provider configurations using the clusterctl config file [1]
- Add more providers after init, eventually specifying the target namespace and the watching namespace [2]

> - Add more instance of an existing provider in another namespace/with a non-overlapping watching namespace [2]

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Add more instances of an existing provider in another namespace/with a non-overlapping watching namespace [2]
```

*TBD: if delete force deleting workload cluster or preserve them / how to make this behavior configurable*

*[2] The clusterctl tools always try to preserve what is actually running and deployed, in that case the Cluster API objects for workload clusters. The --hard flag can be used to force deletion of the Cluster API objects and CRD definitions, the --hard flag*

**clusterctl reset**

Reset sequence goal is to restore the management cluster to its initial state [1], and this basically will be implemented as hard deletion of all the installed providers

*[1] TBD: we should make delete force deleting workload cluster or preserve them (or give an option to the user for this)*

### Risks and Mitigations

- R: Change in clusterctl behavior can disrupt some current users
- M: Work with the community to refine this spec and take their feedback into account.
- R: Precondition of having a working Kubernetes cluster might increase the adoption bar, especially for new users.
- M: Document requirements and quick ways to get a working Kubernetes cluster either locally (e.g. kind) or in the cloud (e.g. GKE, EKS, etc.).

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 6: This section can probably be removed if there is no content

## Upgrade Strategy

> Upgrades will be considered a first class feature to clusterctl, and fully supported.  At the time of this writing we recommend that the Kubernetes operator backup their management clusters with a tool such as velero prior to upgrade.  If a failure condition occurs, the operator can then restore the state of their management cluster using that tool.

Reviewer 6: This section should be rewritten to address `clusterctl` upgrades, for example I have clusterctl v0.1.0 installed and I want to upgrade to v0.2.0

- As a Kubernetes operator I would like to have a simple user experience to cleanly remove the Cluster API objects from a management cluster.

#### Target Cluster Pivot Management

- As a Kubernetes operator I would like to pivot Cluster API components from a management cluster to a target cluster.

#### Provider Enablement

- As a Cluster API provider developer, I would like to use my current implementation, or a new version, with clusterctl without recompiling.  

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

> Portions of clusterctl may require changes to the Cluster API data model and/or the definition of new conventions for the providers in order to enable sets of user stories listed above, therefore a roadmap and feature deliverables will need to be coordinated over time.

As of this writing, we envision clusterctl’s component model to look similar to the diagram below:

![components](images/clusterctl-redesign/components.png)

Clusterctl consists of a single binary artifact implementing a CLI; the same features exposed by the CLI will be made available to other management tools via a client library.

> During provider installation, clusterctl internal pkg/lib is expected to access provider repositories and read the yaml file specifying all the provider components to be installed in the management cluster.

Reviewer 7: Maybe the internal library should be agnostic with respect of the source of this yaml and the cli or external tool should be the responsible of retrieving it. This would allow external tools to use other sources.

Reviewer: clusterctl will let you specify alternative sources. Pulling from the provider repositories will be a default but not the only option. Does that address your comment?

Reviewer 7: Yes I saw it below.

Reviewer: @pablochacin just checking in - how are you feeling about this question?

#### Init sequence

The clusterctl CLI is optimized for the “day one” experience of using Cluster API, and it will be possible to create a first cluster with two commands after the pre-requisites are met:

```shell
$ clusterctl init --infrastructure aws
$ clusterctl config cluster my-first-cluster | kubectl apply -f -
```

Then, as of today, the CNI of choice should be applied to the new cluster:

```shell
$ kubectl get secret my-first-cluster-kubeconfig -o=jsonpath='{.data.value}' | base64 -D > my-first-cluster.kubeconfig
$ kubectl apply --kubeconfig=my-first-cluster.kubeconfig -f MY_CNI
```

The internal flow for the above commands is the following:

**clusterctl init (AWS):**

![components](images/clusterctl-redesign/init.png)

Please note that “day one” experience:

1. Is based on a list of pre-configured provider repositories; it is possible to add new provider configurations to the list of known providers by using the clusterctl config file (see day 2 operations for more details about this).
2. Assumes init will replace env variables defined in the components yaml read from provider repositories, or error out if such variables are missing.

> 3. Assumes providers will be installed in the namespace defined in the components yaml; at the time of this writing, all the majoir providers ships with components yaml creating dedicated namespaces. This could be customized by specifying the --target-namespace flag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Assumes providers will be installed in the namespace defined in the components yaml; at the time of this writing, all the major providers ship with components yaml creating dedicated namespaces. This could be customized by specifying the --target-namespace flag.
```

> 4. Assumes to not change the namespace each provider is watching on objects; at the time of this writing, all the majoir providers ships with components yaml watching for objects in all namespaces. Pending [1490](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/1490) issue addressed, this could be customized by specifying the --watching-namespace flag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Assumes to not change the namespace each provider is watching on objects; at the time of this writing, all the major providers ship with components yaml watching for objects in all namespaces. Pending [1490](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/1490) issue addressed, this could be customized by specifying the --watching-namespace flag.
```

2. In order to fetch template from a provider repository, Assumes a naming convention should be established (details TBD).
3. Similarly, also template variables should be defined (details TBD).

#### Day 2 operations

The clusterctl command will provide support for following operations

- Add more provider configurations using the clusterctl config file [1]
- Override default provider configurations using the clusterctl config file [1]
- Add more providers after init, eventually specifying the target namespace and the watching namespace [2]
- Add more instances of an existing provider in another namespace/with a non-overlapping watching namespace [2]
- Get the yaml for installing a provider, thus allowing full customization for advanced users
- Create additional clusters, eventually specifying template parameters
- Get the yaml for creating a new cluster, thus allowing full customization for advanced users
- Pivot the management cluster to another management cluster (see next paragraph)
- Upgrade a provider (see next paragraph)
- Delete a provider (see next paragraph)
- Reset the management cluster (see next paragraph)

> *[1] clusterctl will provide support pluggable provider repository implementations. Current plan is to support:*

Reviewer 7: I see my previous comment regarding not using repositories for the provider yamls is partially covered as local file system is also supported. However, I still think external repositories should be handled outside the library (e.g cli)

Reviewer: I don't understand what you mean. Could you please give a specific example of what you dislike, and how you would change it?

Reviewer 7: Simply a separation of concern. As described in the components, there are three layers: cli, client and lib. IMHO the lib should use the simplest non-opinionated source (local files) and let the upper layers (i.e. cli or external tools) where to take this files from.

Reviewer: This sounds like an implementation detail. I would guess the code takes in something like an `io.ReadCloser`. @fabriziopandini would you agree? @pablochacin ok to mark this resolved?

Reviewer 7: Yes, this is definitely an implementation detail. It was triggered because in the section above it says " clusterctl internal pkg/lib is expected to access provider repositories" which is also an implementation detail.

Author: The upper-level layer will be allowed to inject their repository implementation (pluggable provider repository implementations).

But we should consider that most probably not all the library consumers want to implement a custom repository, so the internal lib is going to provide the default repository implementations listed in the doc, not the only file system.

Reviewer: @pablochacin just checking in - how are you feeling about this question?

*[2] in case of more than one instance of the same provider is installed on the management cluster, all the instance of the same provider will be upgraded in a single operation because providers have a mix of namespaced objects and global objects, and thus it is not possible to fully isolate a provider versions.*

*[3] TBD exact details with regards to provider CRDs in order to make object conversion possible*

**clusterctl delete [provider]**

Deleting a provider sequence consist of the following actions:
Identify all the provider components for a provider using the labels applied by clusterctl during install
Delete all the provider components [1] with the exception of CRD definitions [2]

*[1] in case of more than one instance of the same provider is installed on the management cluster, only the provider components in the provider namespace are going to be deleted thus preserving global components required for the proper functioning of other instances.*
*TBD: if delete force deleting workload cluster or preserve them / how to make this behavior configurable*

> *[2] The clusterctl tools always try to preserve what is actually running and deployed, in that case the Cluster API objects for workload clusters. The --hard flag can be used to force deletion of the Cluster API objects and CRD definitions, the --hard flag*

Reviewer: Extra `the --hard flag` at the end?
